---
title: Eliminating vs Improving Trust with Tech
tags: ["web", "technology"]
---
Technology has always been great at connecting people. It may not have been perfect, and has often been berated for the specific ways it has done things, but, more often than not, its achieved what its set out to do. Even today, coming up with better ways of communication seems to always be a point of interest for the industry. Ironically, however, increasing connections often ends up decreasing trust.

A lot of the innocuous problems we face in our day-to-day, in-the-flesh interactions with people come from a desire to trust. We want to trust people and we want them to trust us. A hallmark of technological communication (technology not necessarily meaning digital by the way - books and telephones count) is scale. You can reach way more people using technology than ever possible, in the flesh, in a lifetime. A side-effect of this kind of scale is impersonality. Since you're not meeting the people individually, or partaking in the friendly push-pull to figure out boundaries, you never really feel a sense of trust or comfort with anyone. You may be "communicating" with them regularly, but that's it.

Trustfulness is a majorly under-looked factor that shapes the socio-economics of a community. The smaller and more tight knit a community is, the more we adopt a system that relies on trust - for, at smaller scales, we _can_ trust. As the community grows larger than our monkey brains are capable of tangibly understanding - a scale comprehensible only by intellect and abstract logic - we start using the same intellect to come with systems that rely less and less on direct human trust. To quote Nassim Taleb, _"I am, at the Fed level, libertarian; at the state level, Republican; at the local level, Democrat; and at the family and friends level, a socialist."_

The problem of trust is something that technology cannot solve (yet?). No matter what aggregated ratings for any online account may be, that deep, intimate, human trust in another human comes only after a few brief personal interactions. It takes the absence of technology and the realism of direct connection for an intimate bond to develop. That's not to say making friends online isn't possible - it absolutely is and happens quite often - it does, however, take a longer time, and, more often than not, is restricted to a rather narrow facet of life that the two of you share.

So how does society (and technology) solve the problem of trust in connections that are not going to last long enough? The oldest trick in the book is that of monetary incentive. You don't have to trust the other person because they have a vested self-interest in 'behaving ethically'.  Another one is reputation and fame, where the consequences of the interactions are highly public - once again, trust is eliminated on the grounds that each party has their reputation on the line. Analog tech goes in the same direction. An author, for example, has vested self-interest in terms of finance as well as reputation, to write books that are not factually inaccurate and don't incite hatred. Providing authentic value is rewarded. Digital technologies tend to use aggregated metrics to delegate the job of determining trust to an algorithm that has access to the feedback of thousands of users - rather than you having to have thousands of interactions with the other party, the algorithm simply observes thousands of their interactions, quantifies it, and presents it to you in the form of a rating (like your Uber driver).

We employ a delegation of trust to interact with large corporations in the same way. We use Google and Meta's products in-spite of their infamously shady management of data, because crossing the line too far would, for them, mean a collapse of reputation and large scale fiscal loss. We trust banks with our money for the same reason - being (the society's current definition of) good is far more profitable, at least in a capitalist sense, than evil.

And that brings me to the direction of steps that recent technologies have been taking. With world-class encryption based tech being readily available to regular developers, digital networks seem to headed not in a direction of improving trust (however proxied), but completely eliminating the need for it.

Take cryptocurrencies, for example. Pseudonymous accounts transacting money with each other anywhere in the world without needing to trust any individual. Blockchain networks are robust enough to act as universal sources of truth at a global scale. Is this better or worse than the trust based system banks work with? Smart contracts can take this foundation and let us build arbitrary pieces of software that live on this network, and can observe, add to or manipulate this global truth, eliminating the need to trust anybody else. Is this desirable in the first place? Should there even exist such a thing as a global truth?

_(Of course one may argue that this is still trust in mathematics, cryptography and network security.)_

My personal opinion, at least with the current state of things, swings more _for_ these systems than _against._ The less personal incentives are required for communication, the more authentic and unadulterated those communication channels will be. The fewer zero-sum games you are habituated to playing, the more welcoming you will be of positive-sum ones. It will leave us with even more mental bandwidth for creative and expressive tasks.

On the flipside, however, is the argument that trustless systems are too intellectual to be internally accepted at the intimate level mentioned earlier. Humans are social animals with a need and desire to trust and be trusted, and to connect with things we trust. The trustless direction technology seems to be headed towards will only serve to increase the anxiety and loneliness that seem to be defining mental states of our age.

Or perhaps, like most other things, a hybrid of the two will be what the world settles on. Perhaps we will finally see the global economic model evolve into something we've never seen before, or perhaps, disappointingly, we will just see existing or previously existing systems re-implemented with the shiny new tech.  What does end up happening, only time will tell.

I, for one, am optimistic.